Okay, we've got the tape rolling.
Okay, I have just one more question on the immortals.
As you were noting, the TV series concentrated on the idea of the chase, but the book had
a totally different...
Well, it wasn't a chase in the novel.
You had some other ideas, I think, about medicine and so forth.
Could you just...
Well, my concern was not particularly...
Well, certainly the notion of the search for the immortal, the person that I call Cartwright,
Marshall Cartwright, was in there to provide a core of interest.
But I was primarily interested in the novel on the impact of the possibility of immortality
on society itself, and interested in dealing with those kinds of impulses that people have
relating to immortality and longevity.
And in a certain sense, the immortals embodies as well as anything else that I've written,
my basic philosophical position in my work that can be traced through almost all of it,
I suspect, that there are no real villains in life.
There are only people who want the same things everybody else wants, but who are willing
to do to get them things that other people are not willing to do.
And that the best things in life can be wanted too much, that if anything that is considered good
can be an evil.
And I suppose one of the basic concepts with which I began the immortals was the concept that
everybody thinks it would be wonderful to live forever.
But what if you had a man who accidentally could live forever, but who also whose blood
could rejuvenate other people, and his life would be made miserable?
And from there, of course, the entire extrapolation about the ways in which society, knowing the
possibility of immortality would force people, would force society to pour more and more
and more money into medicine until the law of diminishing returns would mean that half
of the world would be devoted to medicine and everybody else would be starving in the slum.
Okay, fine.
Let me skip forward to one of your more recent books.
I think the hardback edition was called The Dreamers.
The hardback edition is called The Mindmaster.
Right.
I guess the scientific basis or the thing that you're working with in that book is chemical
memory.
Could you explain the scientific basis for that?
Yes.
As long ago as a quarter of a century ago, experiments began at various places and were
continued at the University of Michigan by a man named McConnell with a simple kind of
life called planarian worms and in other places with rats and even chickens and other kinds
of vertebrate life.
And some of the experiments that they did seemed to indicate that memory can be transmitted
chemically.
Some of the worms, for instance, where they learned to go to travel through simple mazes
would be chopped up and fed to the other worms and they seemed to learn how to go through
the mazes quicker.
Similarly, some of the rats that they train who normally prefer dark places and fear light
could be trained by electric shocks to do just the opposite, to prefer white places and
fear going into dark places and then they would make an extract of their brains and
injected the other rats and they seemed to exhibit the same kind of behavior as if it
had been injected in them from the other rats and many experiments have actually gone
on in this area.
Now, not everybody, all biologists do not believe that this is true.
They don't believe in the evidence and think it can be explained in other ways but at least
there is a solid body of scientific evidence which suggests that maybe there's something
going on there and I took this, these possibilities and asked myself what would happen.
If it really were perfected, if one could encode information into molecules, protein
molecules, they seemed to think it probably used messenger RNA perhaps and this information
could be injected to other people so that they would not have to study it or learn about
it in class, they would have the information from an injection and then beyond that I sort
of used that notion peripherally in my novel campus and then beyond that when I took up
the dreamers I based an entire world on the notion that people would want to go beyond
the knowledge to experience and they would live lives which were basically injections
of other people's experiences which they would be able to obtain in the form of injections.
Well now the mnemonist in that story, I think that's the way it would be pronounced.
You describe him as a decision maker and sort of a memory machine but I still had a few
little vague spots about what actually his function was or what he did.
Could you just explain that briefly?
Well my feeling was and of course being the mnemonist there are four sections which really
serve as a frame for three other major dramatic episodes each of which is a kind of love story
and I really embedded him in order to sort of link the other three together in more than
simply a subject or location way.
Nevertheless he does function I think in the book and rather interestingly.
But I felt that a world like this which primarily exists because of computers and machine operations
might be able to continue for a while without human intervention but that inevitably some
kinds of imperfections would creep in and that it could not over the long run continue
to exist.
And I felt the need of that there would be a need for someone like the mnemonist to exercise
a basic kind of unifying control over the machines to keep them to make the decisions
that needed to be made which were outside perhaps of the range of decision making that
the computers would have.
And his need at the point when the story begins is that he recognizes that his body, his physical
body, his deteriorating after many many years is being sort of part of the flow of information
and that he needs to find his successor if this world is going to continue and his exploration
of the lives of these three people in the predict episodes is part of his effort to
find that successor.
But at the end of that book if I read it correctly or if I remember it correctly the mnemonist
doesn't seem to be able to find a replacement he sort of is getting tired of what he's
doing he's yearning for an end to everything.
Of course he also is dying he recognizes the fact that he's dying which is what tells him
to seek a replacement and each replacement that he samples falls short in one way or
another does not have the kind of dedication to information that he has and ultimately
all of them fail and he himself at the end stops and trails off into nothing because
he is dying that is and he also kind of longs for an end to this continual flow of information
Well, could what I be wrong in reading the end of that book too as sort of a comment
on the fact that this kind of lifestyle is dreaming is sort of a dead end existence.
Yes, I think that's quite true.
It is a comment on the fact that dreaming itself is a non-survival characteristic.
It may be well the most it may be the most satisfying ultimately the most satisfying
experience but as perhaps I said in the joy makers is perhaps repeated here a different
way that ultimate satisfaction or dreaming is a death activity and that survival demands
something less than total satisfaction.
It demands a certain kind of sacrifice of gratification for other goals and it demands
a certain kind of dissatisfaction in a life I guess one might say is dissatisfaction.
Yeah, one more comment or question on that book I being a literary person myself I'm
always fascinated with the way you work in great literary classics or allusions in your
work.
That's a kind of weakness of mine I think I do like like epigraph and throughout my books
I've sprinkled them perhaps more than most people are interested in.
No, I think they're beautifully done.
The listeners of course was sort of uses the poem the listeners in the background and then
for instance with the mnemonist I think it was perfect to use say Tennyson's Lotus Eaters
you know as an escape a dream.
My question would be my particular one on that book the last episode the one with the
dreamer when you sort of actually in a fascinating way retell a story of the Iliad.
Yes.
A lot of people haven't thought that was so great but I thought it was great.
I'm glad you agree with me I really really enjoyed doing that one.
No, that was fascinating I'm gonna I have been trying to find ways I could work that
book into my my world literature class and have the kids read that instead of the real
Iliad.
Well I have one review from Texas I think some Texas newspaper that was sent to me who said
you know he really betrays his lack of ability when he compares himself with Homer which
one of what I was trying to do what I was really trying to do in lots of ways was to
retell the Iliad from the viewpoint of the Trojans and from basically the viewpoint of
Paris and to reinterpret the mythical elements as the mistaken notions of a dreamer that
he actually is controlling this dream in the way that Homer said that God's controlled
it.
Oh yeah no it worked very well I've I think it gives you know just the whole idea of using
some work of literature great work of literature within your own work is gives it a resonance
or a depth that I think.
I'm glad you feel that way.
I certainly felt like that I thought it was really the most successful of the three stories
but three episodes.
One more question on that I have thought of the dreamer himself becomes so obsessed with
the dream and his love for Helen that he you know stays in it and does away with everything
else in his own life and obviously he's going to die at the end of it in the dream he's
going to die.
In fact there are premonitions yes.
Okay now is he going to die in real life too?
It's my feeling yes that he's become so you know he's cut himself off so much from the
rest of existence and that he has become so identified it's so self-identified with Paris
that he is going to when the arrow the poisoned arrow flies through the sky and strikes him
in the eye and the wrist and so forth that that's going to kill him.
Obviously Paris cannot survive if the Elliott and my feeling is although other people can
argue with it was that Samuel the dreamer will die also at that moment.
Now that was my impression I thought he would too.
Yes.
Listen on almost well much of your work not all of it but say the immortals the joy makers
the listeners the dreamers and so forth this has been noted by I guess readers of yours
but those books are set up as a sort of a series of novelettes or interrelated novelettes
and I wondered why you picked that particular writing style.
Well I might say that only about three or four of my books are not written that way
my first two books were not campus is not it was written as a novel a kind of episodic
novel and the magicians was not but this was a conscious decision back when I was freelance
writing full time and I was trying to make a living at it and I wrote my first novel
this Fortress World and it took me about three months which was needed particularly fast
nor particularly slow but the way speed which I was writing other things and out of that
I made a total of about five hundred dollars because it wasn't serialized anywhere just
no.
Since then it's made more than that but at the time only brought me that much money and
I also wrote Starbridge in collaboration with Jack Williamson just about the same time and
out of that I got half of five hundred dollars two hundred fifty dollars so I had a total
return for six months of work with about seven hundred fifty dollars and I decided that wouldn't
do you know I couldn't make a living that way and I also had the feeling as I expressed
in my collection my scribe's collection Some Dreams of Nightmares I also had the feeling
that really the ideal form for science fiction is not the novel but the novelette or the
short novel because the novel demands a kind of solution to a major problem for which basically
those solutions are possible if they were possible those problems that already be solved
and also most novels, most science fiction novels tend to start at a very high level
of intensity and kind of fall apart at the end. The intensity and interest is hard to
sustain and when you try to wind it up it seems kind of flat whereas in the novelette
you aren't required to resolve major problems only the particular problems within the novelette
but you have length enough to establish a different world in which to operate. So at
that time I decided that when I got a novel idea I would think of it in terms of novelettes
which I get published in the magazines and then bring together in the form of books and
thus get paid twice for it and out of that came my what since become known as guns law
among the students in my institute which is nothing is worth writing unless you can
sell it at least twice and as a consequence I have since that time mostly written by novels
in the form of publishable fragments or individual stories and in a way I think it's worked rather
well because in the joy makers I was able to use as a framework as a subject matter
really an idea rather than a person or a group of people and so this novel which extended
over about 200 years picked up several different people but basically was about one thing science
of happiness and similarly the immortals which also continued for about 200 years and the
listeners which took a cover about 150 years and all of these seemed to me to focus on
an idea which is what science fiction mostly does and deals historically or in the future
history way with its development without feeling compelled to carry any character through entirely
in a way which might be difficult to achieve legitimately.
Yeah okay guns law is a little bit disillusioning to me.
Well I would say that it's not completely commercial and as a matter of fact it seems
to me to apply to other kinds of endeavor that is that there are an awful lot of things
that people can put their hands to ways to spend their time to spend their creative and
intellectual energies and you have to be able to judge between these.
How are you going to spend your time particularly in terms of a writer he has so many ideas
that he's never going to be able to deal with them all in his lifetime and so he has to
be able to choose between them and it seems to me guns law says think about those which
are most productive which have the most substance to them and they are the ones that you ought
to focus on.
Not simply craftslayer the money they might bring in but the audiences to which they might
have something to say.
Well I understand that I was being facetious when I said that but the reason I brought
it up we interviewed Jack Vance and I asked him what he would like to be remembered for
or as you know when he finishes the body of his work and he said I would like to be remembered
as a very rich science fiction writer.
Yeah well I've given up that notion you know I think I realize I'm never going to be rich
unless the listeners which is now under option to a television studio has turned into a long
running television series which I doubt or some other one of my books has picked up and
made into a gigantic movie.
I'm going to have to be satisfied doing what I'm doing and it's really worked out pretty
well.
Well I would have said that almost any work that you've written it's so strong in terms
of the idea behind it that any one of those would make beautiful series or movies I can't
understand why they haven't even picked up more.
Well there have been you know the listeners was picked up before and some of my other
stories have been picked up and I think one of the reasons why in a sense some of the
television motion picture companies have been interested is because of my experience in
play writing my work tends to be pretty visual and to occur in the form of scenes which can
be visualized as taking place and I think that visual quality as well as the idea behind
it is appealing and I think for another aspect of it I've always felt that each book was
a different task and I approached each not as any sequel to anything but as an individual
problem in writing and did them all individually and never as far as I can remember ever having
written anything strictly for money it was always because I wanted to write it.
No I would have suspected that. Listen I have more material but this is taking a great deal
of your time I'm sure.
Well I'm going to go on as long as you are.
Well I don't that might be a little that might take too much time but if you're still okay
I do have some more.
Okay go ahead.
I just wanted to check with you. Okay let's see let me just skip to all of the questions
a whole new area I did have some more questions about your work but let me go ahead to a different
kind of area.
Oh let's see what about some of your short stories.
Let me make this kind of two questions I guess I was going to ask you a question about fantasy
just sort of in general how you differentiate it from science fiction and why you don't write
more of it but some of your short stories you do get I guess kind of what I'm not sure
playful is the right word but one of my favorites was Cinderella story where you sort of retold
the I guess the folktale of Cinderella.
Let me specify let me focus down why did you do that just to have a fun story to write.
Well it just the idea occurred to me and in part I think because myths and fairy tales
are good things to retell and Bob Sheckley for instance has done a lot of these and in
fact at one time when I was talking to him about a problem I have with the story I forgot
which one it was he said well my friend says whenever I have a problem just go look for
a good fairy tale and it will fill the gap.
I didn't know whether that occurred to me at the time but certainly I did have the notion
I was going to retell this story as another kind of you know as it might have worked
out under different kinds of influences and I think you are right occasionally I do like
to tell a story in kind of a playful and I hope amusing way.
My own feeling about fantasy I haven't written a great deal of it mostly because I don't
think you can say things you can incorporate ideas in fantasy as easily and most of the
fantasies I've done it rather humorous and mostly I guess I'm concerned with writing
an idea that really grabs me by the throat and says deal with me.
I also have a feeling too I think the fantasy is somehow not quite as good as science fiction
because it doesn't demand the same kind of rigor it seems a little looser a little freer
and that's maybe less demanding maybe it's too easy to write.
Certainly today there's an awful lot of fantasy being published mostly adventure fantasy and
I find this uninteresting and I'm kind of just floored a little bit because I wonder
who out there is reading it and whether it's the people who are reading it belong to a
group like the people who are into the occult and into UFOs and who are looking for some
answer other than the human intelligence and the human courage to solve their problems.
Yeah I was going to ask you why you thought it was so popular today it seems to be.
Yeah and I think I'm not sure and I'm dealing with this in a in the SFRA annual meeting
that's coming up I've just gotten finished writing the first draft of an article which
I may use as an address for that meeting in July dealing with the question of the audience
that is may or may not be out there for fantasy it may be a publishing phenomenon stimulated
by Tokens Lord of the Rings trilogy success and but there apparently are people out there
buying it and reading it and in a way it represents a kind of dangerous tendency I think if it
is as popular as it seems because I think it threatens to swamp the science fiction
novel which I think is more important. This is sort of a comment but we interviewed Terry
Carr a couple weeks ago and he thought that fantasy is more difficult to write because
to make it to make it what to create a real world that's an imaginary one that's not extrapolated
takes he thought more skill than it does to write a science fiction book.
He may be right or it may just be a different different people with different definitions
of difficulty. I recognize the fact that in my fantasies that I've written I'm not primarily
trying to create a new fantasy world what I'm trying to do is to change one element
in today's world in a fantastic way and see how contemporary life reacts to it and that's
a different matter. Okay this may be one more question on fantasy. You sort of implied some
ideas about this earlier. You might just briefly tell me though why or how how would you personally
differentiate it from science fiction? I think it's a very important differentiation
because I think it matters in the way we approach science fiction and fantasy as readers.
Science fiction though it deals with a world that is different from the one we live in
here and now either through the alteration of one thing or maybe by a significant alteration
in the future and but nevertheless we recognize that this is a world that we can get to from
here. It exists in our universe even though that universe may be far extended into distance
or time but there is a clear sequence of events which take us there according to the basic
laws that we know operate in terms of both the physical laws and psychological laws and
so forth. In fantasy it is a radical different world but one which we can't get to from
here it is not our universe it is some new different universe in which the laws are
different and when we read science fiction we automatically make intellectual comparisons
you know really hard core science fiction and I think one thing that's confusing about
science fiction is the fact that a lot of other things are brought in to the science fiction
adventure, romance and the gothic and detective story all of them can be told as science fiction
stories. Nevertheless in the real hard core science fiction novel you're expected to make
intellectual comparisons between here and now and the there and then of the novel and
this relates on an intellectual level. When you read fantasy you are supposed to be concerned
with the human psychology and the allegorical meaning. You do not use the word for the meaning
you use intellectual perceptions of how we got there from here because there is no way
to get there from here and so you read it with acceptance of the difference and not
with questioning of it. Okay very good listen I better just ask you just a couple more
so we can you know this is last this is really taking too much of your time. One thing I
would like to get your comment on since you I think have a very valuable perspective on
this do you think science fiction has changed much since you became involved in it and what
would those changes be? Well my experience covers 34 years from the time I began writing
it and many more than that at the time I began reading it yes I think it's changed significantly
it has gone from being primarily a magazine literature to primarily a book literature
there are still science fiction magazines being published but it's today primarily it's
primary publications and book form and it has gone from being a category literature
a generic literature to one of much broader acceptance and much broader popularity and
it's gone from being written like most other pulp literature rapidly and with a certain
carelessness for basic skills of storytelling literature to what is now certainly comfortable
with any other kind of writing in terms of its literary value. I'm sure you've noted
this I wonder what your response to it is the proliferation of trilogies that are written
these days some people feel that that is sort of leading to second class writing when people
have to write the trilogy do you have any ideas about that? Yes I would sort of agree
with that although certainly I can understand the authorial necessity to do it because it
seems to pay off and increased audience and increased sales and the publishers wanting
to do that but I agree that I think it's a poorer or more like a more more like a more
more it's a poorer art form and I've never really felt the necessity or the desirability
of writing novel or writing sequel I've always felt that if I can't say it in one book I
really haven't thought it through very well and I think the economic pressures are leading
authors to not only to write sequels but even to extend theories long beyond the point
at which there are artistic impulses say it should be ended. The originally doomed was
supposed to be a trilogy and now Frank Herbert has accepted a contract in advance to write
a fifth volume simply because the preceding one's a sold better. Similarly Gene Wolfe
has agreed to write a fifth volume to his planned tetralogy the book of the new sun
and young writers are coming into the field thinking that the way to success is to take
a series of characters and bring them through what essentially is an adventure series of
adventures which is what most trilogies are. There are adventure novels, there are adventure
novels with very little science fiction background to them. There are exceptions of course, and
the book of the new sun both are more carefully planned but most series most trilogies are
simple adventure stories. Okay I would just have one more could you tell me what your
future plans are for your own writing in terms of fiction and criticism both? Right now I
am sort of between books. I have had for a long time a plan for a very ambitious novel
and maybe I'll get down to working at that one of these days. I want to write some short
stories particularly I want to try to continue a series of stories that I began in the early
with a story called child of the sun several years ago which I viewed originally as a series
and had been a chance to deal with and I think could be a significant development and one
which I had initially proposed as a television series and was at one point actually option
for a possible television series and I do still have a book or two of criticism or collections
of stories that I'd like to do. I'd like to do a collection for instance of English science
fiction stories because there isn't anything in current production currently available.
I'd like to use it in my classes. Mostly the books I've done in criticism have been those
books which I felt I wanted for my class but I wasn't able to find anywhere so I did
them myself. Okay fine Mr. Garnersen what we'll do I really appreciate the time you've given
us this is a long time if you wouldn't mind if we don't make it up for that SFRA meeting
maybe sometime in the fall we could call you back and get a little more because there's
a whole area of questions like on the SFRA and SFWA and so forth that we had but listen
what we'll do is when these shows are edited we will send you copies of the tapes and also
I will send you a list we will find out if there are any stations in your area that carry
the show. Okay. I'd like to know that. And so if possibly if you ever want to pick it
up we don't have a complete list from our syndicator yet but when we get it I'll send
that on to you. Well good luck to you and I you know stay in touch. And thank you very
much we appreciate your time sir. Right. Bye. Bye.